(all) hot and bothered
zmieszany, zakłopotany lub zły
Jim gets all hot and bothered when I mention his ex-girlfriend.


(not) give a toss
nie obchodzić, nie interesować (w przeczeniach)
I don't give a toss that you are tired. You are supposed to finish it today! (nic mnie nie obchodzi, że..


(to be) a bit rusty
'przykurzony' (o umiejętnościach, znajomości np. języka itp.)
My apologies if my Spanish is a bit rusty, I hope you understand the intention of the message.


(with your) hands down
z palcem w nosie, z łatwością
Don't stay up all night, his tests are so easy you'll pass them with your hands down.


a babe in the woods
bezradny jak dziecko
When it comes to dealing with computers, he's a babe in the woods. He definitely needs someone to help.


a backseat driver
pasażer bez przerwy pouczający kierowcę samochodu
I hated travelling with my parents - my dad took it patiently but, to tell the truth, my mum was a terrible backseat driver.


a bad patch
zła passa
Last season we hit a bad patch of form and suddenly we were out of the Champions League.


a big noise
wielka szycha
This guy is said to be a big noise in drug trafficking. The police have been after him for a long time.


a big-head
zarozumialec, ważniak
Tom told me that all his friends are less intelligent than he is. He's such a big head!


a black look
gniewne, pełne nienawiści spojrzenie
Mary gave me a black look when I entered the office.


a blue movie/film
film pornograficzny
Blue movies are rated X, which means that only people of 18 and over can watch them.


a blue-eyed boy
ulubieniec
Tom was always jealous of his younger brother because he knew Jack was their mother's blue-eyed boy.


a bone of contention
przedmiot sporu, kość niezgody
The choice of place for holiday turned out to be a real bone of contention in their family this year.


a bundle of nerves
kłębek nerwów, bardzo nerwowa osoba
After all the problems I've had recently I'm just a bundle of nerves now.


a cold fish
ktoś niewrażliwy
He's such a cold fish - you can never see any emotions on his face.


a counsel of despair
akt rozpaczy
Her desicion to leave the country after she was fired was a counsel of despair.


a cutting/biting remark
cięta, złośliwa uwaga
Finally, I was fed up with his biting remarks about my size and I left him.


a day off (to have/take/get)
mieć wolne
I think I am overworked - I certainly need a day off!


a dog's life
psie życie
Without family and friends, it's a dog's life.


a drop in the ocean
kropla w morzu
We're grateful for your help although it's just a a drop in the ocean of our needs.


a far cry from sth
zupełnie inny, nie mający nic wspólnego
This house is a far cry from the one we were shown yesterday; it's much nicer.


a flash in the pan
słomiany zapał; fiasko; klapa
He wants to learn foreign languages, but it may be only a flash in the pan.


a gap year
rok przerwy podczas którego podróżuje się i zdobywa doświadczenie
I'm considering taking a gap year, to develop myself and increase my self-confidence


a golden handshake
duża odprawa
Ms. Robinson retired early because her company offered her a golden handshake.


a little something
drobnostka, niedrogi prezent
I want to get a little something for Ben and visit him in the hospital.


a man of few words
ktoś małomówny
Michael is a man of few words, but when he speaks, people listen.


a pack of lies
stek kłamstw
What Jack told me about you is a pack of lies; I don't believe him.


a piece of cake
nic trudnego, pestka
Climbing that mountain was a piece of cake. No problem at all.


a ray of hope
promyk nadziei
There is a ray of hope for humanity after all.


a ray of hope
promyk nadziei
Thank you so much for the ray of hope that shines in your message.


a sharp tongue
cięty język
I like her, but sometimes her sharp tongue irritates me so much.


a shot in the dark
strzał w ciemno, na chybił trafił
It was just a shot in the dark. I don't know what the correct answer is.


a sitting duck
łatwy cel
Old people who walk after dark in the dimly lit streets are sitting ducks.


a slap in the face
policzek
It was a real slap in the face when she didn't answer my phone calls.


a slip of the tongue
przejęzyczenie
It was just a slip of the tongue but in politics it may cost you your career.


a slowcoach
guzdrała
Jimmy! Hurry up, please! You're such a slowcoach! Can't you move faster?


a stag party/night
wieczór kawalerski
Forget about your wives! It's strictly a stag party.


a stone's throw
rzut beretem
Oh, come on! Go and get me some drinks, the shop is just a stone's throw from here.


a tough nut to crack
twardy orzech do zgryzienia
This project turned out to be a tough nut to crack.


a vicious circle
błędne koło
He thinks he is a failure so he drinks. The more he drinks the more he fails. It's a vicious circle.


a walk of life
sfera społeczna
He has friends from many different walks of life.


Achilles heel
pięta Achillesa
Speaking in public is my Achilles heel; I'm simply too shy.


after your own heart
bratnia dusza
She loves books too - she's a woman after my own heart!


against all odds
pomimo wszystkich przeciwności
Against all odds, he won that contest and became a well-known actor.


agony column
"napisz do Kasi", kolumna z poradami dla czytelników
I just love to read the agony column in teenage magazines. Their problems are sometimes so weird.


all of a sudden
nagle
All of a sudden the lights went out.


all year round
przez cały rok
Most of the hotels are open all year round.


all's well that ends well
wszystko dobre, co się dobrze kończy
The weather was terrible when we arrived in France but after two days it changed completely and we had a wonderful holiday. All's well that ends well.


an arm and a leg
mnóstwo pieniędzy
That car is great but it cost me an arm and a leg.


an early bird
ranny ptaszek
My father is an early bird, he gets up at 5.30 every day.


as a matter of fact
prawdę mówiąc, w rzeczywistości
As a matter of fact, I love him very much.


as deaf as a post
głuchy jak pień
I'm afraid there's no point in talking to my grandfather; he's as deaf as a post.


as fresh as a daisy
wyglądający i czujący się rześko
Although I came back late from the party last night I was as fresh as a daisy in the morning.


as hard as nails
twardy, nie okazujący emocji
My supervisor is very kind to me but my boss is as hard as nails.


as poor as a church mouse
biedny jak mysz kościelna
We have to help her; she's as poor as a church mouse.


as sick as a dog
bardzo chory
I was as sick as a dog after eating a hamburger from a fast food restaurant yesterday.


as stubborn as a mule
uparty jak osioł
I was trying to make my father go to a doctor at last but he's as stubborn as a mule.


ask for trouble
prosić się o kłopoty
Not wearing a seat belt is just asking for trouble.


at all costs
za wszelką cenę
We must win at all costs.


at death's door
na łożu śmierci
My poor grandmother is very ill now and I'm afraid she's at death's door.


at first sight
na pierwszy rzut oka
At first sight he seems to be a very competent person.


at heart
w głębi duszy
She said she trusted him but at heart she knew he was lying.


at large
na wolności, na swobodzie
There are fewer and fewer exotic species living at large.


at random
losowo
The burglar didn't have any plan - he just entered the shop and grabbed things at random.


at sb's expense
1. na czyjś rachunek; 2. czyimś kosztem
The trip is at company's expense.


at sb's expense
1. na czyjś rachunek; 2. czyimś kosztem
We are always making jokes at Mark's expense.


at short notice
w ostatniej chwili, bezzwłocznie
I'm so sorry I ask you for help at such short notice but I didn't realize this project would be so demanding.


at the crack of dawn
o brzasku, o świcie
We have to set off at the crack of dawn tomorrow - it gets scorching hot during the day and travelling then is not possible.


at the eleventh hour
w ostatniej chwili
We were so nervous that he would miss the train but he, as usual, arrived to the railway station at the eleventh hour.


at the top of your voice
na całe gardło
They are always discussing things at the top of their voices. It's so annoying.


at times
czasami, niekiedy
I think everyone gets a bit lonely at times.


be a wet blanket
psuć nastrój
Please somebody make Jane change the subject! With her stories from her childhood, she can be a real wet blanket.


be at one's best
być w najlepszej formie
There is no doubt he is to win this race - he is at his best now!


be in force
obowiązywać
Don't worry about that - that rule is no longer in force in our office.


be in the air
nierealne, niepewne
The initial plans to publish this book in May are quite in the air.


be in the pay of sb
być na usługach kogoś (tajnych)
Hmmm... I have the impression that some data have been leaking from the company since Hans was employed here... Do you think he may be in the pay of our competitor?


be in the red
mieć debet (w banku)
It has been announced that the company will still be in the red for the rest of this year.


be in two minds about sth
być w rozterce, wahać się
Well, I don't know. I am still in two minds about buying this car. It's second-hand you know...


be left stranded
być zostawionym samemu sobie (z kłopotami), utknąć
That party was a disaster! Everybody was having fun and I was left stranded with that boring guy who sat next to me.


be on the air
być na antenie
Quiet everybody! Three, two, one ... You are on the air!


be on the crest of a wave
przeżywać dobry, pomyślny okres; być "na fali"
The Rasmus are currently on the crest of a wave, they are extremely popular among teenagers.


be out of order
nie działać
I am sorry but this telephone is out of order. You have to go round the corner.


be quits (with somebody)
być kwita
You give me 10 zloty and we're quits.


be rolling in money
mieć mnóstwo pieniędzy, spać na pieniądzach
They dream of the day when they'll be rolling in money.


be under the illusion
łudzić się
I think Mark's under the illusion that he will be the new director.


be worlds apart
bardzo się różnić
I really like this book but I guess it is worlds apart from what the real situation is.


beat about/around the bush
owijać w bawełnę, unikać przejścia do sedna sprawy
Stop beating about the bush and tell me what the problem is!


beat somebody black and blue
zbić kogoś na kwaśne jabłko
Tommy always threatens his little sister that he will beat her black and blue if she tells their parents about his marks at school.


before someone's (very) eyes
na czyichś oczach
She took my bicycle before my eyes; she didn't even ask me for it!


bite/snap sb's head off
odpyskować
I only asked if I could borrow the book. There's no need to bite my head off!


blind date
randka w ciemno
Sheila is so desperate in her search for a husband - she's decided to have a blind date!


Boxing Day
w Anglii - drugi dzień Świąt Bożego Narodzenia
Boxing Day - the day after Christmas, which is a public holiday in the UK, or the first Monday after Christmas if Christmas is on Friday or Saturday. It is called 'Boxing Day' because traditionally it was the day when servants were given a 'Christmas box'


budding scientist
obiecujący naukowiec
The Academy authorities think he is a budding scientist so he is pampered with grants and scholarships.


burst out laughing
wybuchać śmiechem
The movie was so funny that finally even Susan burst out laughing.


by all means
wszelkimi sposobami, za wszelka cenę
By all means this guy should work for us - he is the best specialist I have ever seen!


by all means
oczywiście
By all means we will try to answer any questions, so feel free to ask.


by courtesy of
dzięki uprzejmości, za zgodą
These pictures are being shown by courtesy of CNN.


by profession
z zawodu
My mother works as an English teacher but she's an economist by profession.


call it a day
zakończyć coś, przerwać, fajrant
Why don't we call it a day and go home?


catch sb red-handed
złapać kogoś na gorącym uczynku
The trial won't take long as the defendant was caught red-handed.


change a fly into an elephant
robić z igły widły
Gee! She doesn't have an evening dress?! It's just friends' party - why does she have to change a fly into an elephant!


change hands
przechodzić z rąk do rąk
The heavyweight title is about to change hands once again.


chew something over
przemyśleć coś
I can't give you the answer today. I simply need to chew it over.


chicken out
stchórzyć
I wanted to ask Mary out but I chickened out at the last moment.


choose a soft option
pójść na łatwiznę
He gets on my nerves! Whenever there is something challenging, he always chooses a soft option.


come in handy
przydawać się
Never throw away your notes - they may come in handy one day.


come to terms with sth
pogodzić się z czymś
She can't come to terms with the fact that she was fired for being late all the time.


come true
spełniać się
I wish my dreams would come true one day.


come what may
niech się dzieje co chce
I don't care that he is going to be there with his new girlfriend! I will be at the party tonight come what may.


commit a blunder
strzelić gafę
He committed a blunder asking Sue about her husband, while everybody knows that she is divorced.


couch potato
ktoś, kto preferuje siedzący tryb życia
Our 9-year-old son is a real couch potato who wants to spend all his free time watching television.


crocodile tears
krokodyle (nieszczere) łzy
I don't feel sorry for her. They're only crocodile tears.


cry for the moon
chcieć gwiazdki z nieba
Oh, come on! Be realistic! It's like crying for the moon! We cannot afford it.


curiosity killed the cat
ciekawość to pierwszy stopień do piekła
Don't ask her any questions about her marriage. Remember, curiosity killed the cat.


dead easy
dziecinnie proste
Listen! Reported Speech is dead easy - I can explain it to you if you want...


dead on time
punktualnie
I can't be late - Jack always arrives dead on time!


dead-end relationship
beznadziejny związek
Mary is not happy with her marriage - actually, it is a dead-end relationship.


dog tired
bardzo zmęczony
He's been working all day and night; he must be dog tired.


donkey's years
całe wieki
Mary's been working in my company for donkey's years and I won't sack her now.


dull as ditchwater
nudny jak flaki z olejem
The guy I'm going to the wedding with is nice enough, but as dull as ditchwater. I had better take my walkman...


ease sb's mind
uspokajać kogoś
The doctor tried to ease his mind about his daughter's illness.


easier said than done
łatwiej powiedzieć, niż zrobić
I know it's easier said than done but in my opinion you should challenge it.


easy come easy go
łatwo przyszło, łatwo poszło
I've lost the money you gave me last week - well, easy come easy go.


Every cloud has a silver lining.
nie ma tego złego, co by na dobre nie wyszło
Oswald was very depressed after being fired but he found another job in just few days. Well, every cloud has a silver lining.


excuse my French
sorry za słówka
I really wanted to provide the pronunciation to this fucking word "ophthalmologist" but it turned out to be impossible, excuse my French.


faint heart never won fair lady
do odważnych świat należy
It's high time we made a decision! C'mon, faint heart never won fair lady.


figure of speech
przenośnia; zwrot, wyrażenie retoryczne
When I said it was a battle to the death it was just a figure of speech.


first and foremost
nade wszystko
We need peace and stability first and foremost - these are the most important things.


for a change
dla odmiany
She always seemed rather serious so it was nice to see her laugh for a change.


for a laugh
dla zabawy
They put salt in his tea just for a laugh but he didn't find it funny.


for all the tea in China
za nic na świecie
Oh, come on! I am not going to ask him such question! Not for all the tea in China!


for good
na dobre
Jane has gone to France - for good. She's not coming back.


for short
w zdrobnieniu
Her name's Diana or Di for short.


for the sake of
dla czegoś/kogoś
I know that this treatment is unpleasant but you should try it for the sake of your health.


for the time being
na razie
That is all what we can offer for the time being but the service is still developing.


Fort Knox
bank rezerw federalnych, przenośnie: bardzo dobrze strzeżone miejsce
My house is now like Fort Knox but I had to do it - I was burgled three times last month.


free and easy
swobodny, wyluzowany, luźny
I don't mind going to work as the atmosphere in my office is free and easy.


from A to Z
od A do Z; w całości, gruntownie
I respect Mr Wilson as he's a brilliant teacher who knows his subject from A to Z.


from cover to cover
od deski do deski
I always read detective stories from cover to cover; they're so exciting!


from head to foot
od stóp do glów
The dog was covered in mud from head to foot.


from scratch
od samego początku
I learned Spanish from scratch at university.


from the bottom of one's heart
z głębi serca
I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for all your help.


gallows humour
wisielczy humor
The 'Pythons' are famous for their gallows humour.


Get a move on!
pośpiesz się!
Come on, get a move on! I don't want to be late.


Get lost!
Spływaj, zjeżdżaj!
I can't stand your behaviour any more. Get lost!


get on sb's nerves
działać (komuś) na nerwy
Turn that music down! It's getting on my nerves.


get out of my face!
zejdź mi z oczu!
I didn't ask you for your silly comments. Get out of my face!


get straight to the point
przejść do sedna
Carol! Could you just get straight to the point? You want to borrow some money, right?


Get stuffed!
wypchaj się!
I tried to be nice to him but finally he went too far! I simply told him to get stuffed...


get the message
załapać, zrozumieć coś
He finally got the message and left Mary and John alone together.


get up on the wrong side of the bed
wstać lewą nogą
You'd better avoid Mark today - he got up on the wrong side of the bed this morning.


give sb their due
oddawać komuś sprawiedliwość
Mike's not very talkative , but to give him his due, you can always count on him.


give somebody a ring
zadzwonić do kogoś
I'll give you a ring in the evening.


give-and-take
kompromis
You can't insist on having that your way. There must be some sort of give-and-take.


gnash your teeth
zgrzytać zębami
Hell is so terrible that those who go there will weep and gnash their teeth.


gnash your teeth
zgrzytać zębami
Mary gnashes her teeth in frustration.


go back on one's word
cofnąć dane słowo, wycofać sie z obietnicy
I promised to give Frank some money and I can't go back on my word now.


go for a song
sprzedać bardzo tanio
This car went for a song - the owner was leaving the country and wanted a quick sale.


go off the air
zejść z anteny
This program was very popular so the information that it went off the air caused a wave of protest.


go to somebody's head
uderzyć do głowy
Power and success went to his head - he no longer comes to our parties.


go to waste
marnować się
I can't bear to see good food going to waste!


gold rush
gorączka złota
The most famous gold rush was The California Gold Rush that began in 1848.


good riddance (to bad rubbish)
baba z wozu, koniom lżej
So, I hear Rupert has left you? Well, good riddance: he gave you nothing but trouble anyway.


greasy spoon
speluna z tanim żarciem
I'm broke, today we have to eat at this greasy spoon at the corner.


green with envy
zielony z zazdrości
When they see my new boyfriend, all the girls will turn green with envy.


hale and hearty
zdrowy, krzepki
John looks hale and hearty these days and he's very active.


hands are tied
mieć związane ręce, nie móc nic zrobić
I would really like to help you but my hands are tied... I have to wait for Mark's decision.


Hands off!
Łapy precz!
Hands off those chocolates! They are mine!


happy hour
czas, w którym drinki w pubie są sprzedawane taniej
Let's go for a drink to that pub round the corner; it's happy hour now.


have a finger in every pie
wtrącać się we wszystko
I can't stand her any longer! She has to have a finger in every pie! Can't she just mind her own business?


have a narrow escape
cudem uniknąć czegoś, o mały włos
He had a narrow escape when he slipped on the stairs.


have an eye for/on the main chance
myśleć o własnej korzyści; mieć własny interes na uwadze
Jerry doesn't bother about other people and only has an eye on the main chance.


have one foot in the grave
być jedną nogą w grobie
You know this old lady that lives on second floor? She has one foot in the grave but still behaves as if she were 20. ;-)


have something on the brain
chodzić komuś po głowie
Do you know this song? I've had it on my brain all day.


have sth at one's fingertips
mieć coś w małym palcu
You can always go and ask Tom of anything concerned with maths, he just has it at his fingertips.


have your cake and eat it
wilk syty i owca cała; mieć ciastko i zjeść ciastko
You can't have your cake and eat it. If you want high quality you have to pay for it.


heave a sigh
wzdychać (głęboko)
She heaved a sigh of relief when she heard the good news.


hide-and-seek
zabawa w chowanego
Let's play hide-and-seek! I'm seeking first...


high and low
wszędzie
We've searched high and low for this book.


hindsight is always 20-20
mądry Polak po szkodzie
Now I know I should have stayed in that job, but hindsight is always 20-20 - I couldn't have known it when I was leaving.


hit the nail on the head
trafić w sedno
Right! Nothing to add! You've just hit the nail on the head!


hush money
łapówka
Many politicians are believed to accept hush money.


if my memory serves me correctly
jeśli mnie pamięć nie myli
That guy's name is Ben - if my memory serves me correctly.


if you like
jeśli masz na to ochotę
Shall we stop for a rest? Yes, if you like.


in a month of Sundays
na "święty nigdy", nigdy w życiu
He will never bring you these CDs, not even in a month of Sundays - just forget it.


in a nutshell
krótko mówiąc, w skrócie
I don't really like him, in a nutshell, I think he is an idiot.


in a row
z rzędu
It was very cold and it snowed for three days in a row.


in a sense
w pewnym sensie
In a sense she's right, but I still don't understand her point of view.


in a word
jednym słowem
She wasn't able to explain this situation to me. In a word, she is guilty.


in bad taste
w złym guście
Their house is decorated in such bad taste - where did they get the idea of buying these mock rococo chairs to the living room?


in black and white
na piśmie
This agreement is invalid, unless you bring it in black and white.


in bulk
hurtowo
If you buy in bulk, it's 20% cheaper.


in cold blood
z zimną krwią
He killed the girl in cold blood just to get the money.


in fits and starts
nierówno, nieregularnie, sporadycznie, zrywami
He isn't very persevering; he only works in fits and starts.


in good faith
w dobrej wierze
The information is provided in good faith, however we accept no responsibility for the accuracy of the information.


in haste
w pośpiechu
I'm writing in haste to let you know that I won't come on Friday.


in public
publicznie
She feels bad about her divorce and she has never spoken about it in public.


in sb's birthday suit
nago
He was a very controversial figure - he happened to appear on stage in his birthday suit.


in the interim
tymczasem
I'll be back in few minutes. In the interim please read the extract from the novel.


in the middle of nowhere
w szczerym polu
Tom didn't take the map with him so after several hours of going in circles we ended up in the middle of nowhere.


in the wash
w praniu
Oh, I can't put on my red skirt! It's in the wash.


in theory
teoretycznie, w teorii
His plans always sound great in theory but they don't work in practice.


in vain
na próżno
The doctors tried to save the dying man but in vain.


in vain
na próżno
How can you say that our soldiers died in vain?!


in writing
na piśmie
Please confirm the offer in writing next week.


inside out
1. na lewą stronę, 2. (znać) na wylot
He's a real computer freak - he knows them inside out.


it goes without saying
to oczywiste, nie ma dwóch zdań
Oh, Amy you should marry him! It goes without saying.


it isn't up to scratch
poniżej oczekiwań, niewystarczająco dobry
He rejected this market analysis. He said it wasn't up to scratch.


it's a foregone conclusion
to jest z góry przesądzone
Who was to win this match was a foregone conclusion. The team is the national representation after all...


It's a must
to konieczność (koniecznie trzeba zobaczyć, przeczytać, etc)
This movie is a must! It's a breakthrough in Hollywood business.


it's now or never
teraz albo nigdy
If you really want to speak to me, it's now or never. I'm leaving tomorrow.


just in case
na wszelki wypadek
We still have plenty of time but let's take a taxi just in case.


keep a straight face
zachowywać powagę, nie wybuchać śmiechem
Toby can't tell jokes. He never keeps a straight face and starts laughing right before the punch line.


keep sth under one's hat
trzymać coś w tajemnicy
They tried to keep it under their hat but it soon became obvious that she is pregnant.


keep sth/sb at bay
trzymać na dystans, nie dopuszczać do siebie
He always tries to keep his troubles at bay when he is on holiday.


last but not least
rzecz równie ważna (mimo, że wymieniona na końcu)
And last but not least, I would like to thank my parents for all the support they give me.


leap year
rok przestępny
Year 2004 is a leap year, with 29 days in February.


learn sth by heart
nauczyć się na pamięć
There is no rule why these words collocate, you just need to learn them by heart.


leave no stone unturned
poruszyć niebo i ziemię, zastosować wszystkie środki
I may need to leave no stone unturned but I will find this book!


leg it
biegiem!
What are you waiting for?! Leg it to the nearest newsagent's and buy this issue - there is an article about your uncle Tim!


let alone
nie mówiąc już o..
I hardly ever go to the cinema, let alone the theatre.


let sleeping dogs lie
nie wywołuj wilka z lasu
Just don't tell her that he's back in town. I suppose it's better to let sleeping dogs lie.


let something slip
wygadać się
He let slip that he had been in prison.


little by little
stopniowo
After the accident her strength returned little by little.


loony bin
psychiatryk, wariatkowo
Gee... Sometimes when I listen to her opinions I can't help thinking that she qualifies for some loony bin...


make a fool of somebody/yourself
robić z kogoś/siebie głupka
Stop that before you make a fool of yourself!


make a fuss about sth
robić zamieszanie z jakiegoś powodu
Gosh! It is just a broken glass. Don't make a fuss about it.


make amends
wynagradzać szkodę/szkody
He went to him and begged his forgiveness, saying he would do anything he could to make amends.


make oneself at home
rozgościć się
Frank! So many years! Come in and make yourself at home. Something to drink?


make oneself scarce
zmyć sie po cichu
The atmosphere in the room was getting more and more tense, so I made myself scarce on the first possible occasion.


make up one's mind
postanowić, zdecydować się
He finally made up his mind!


my lips are sealed
nie pisnę ani słowa
I won't tell anyone you love Henrietta. My lips are sealed.


nagging headache
uporczywy ból głowy
Jonathan is overworked. That's why he suffers from these nagging headaches so often.


nagging husband/wife
zrzędliwy mąż/żona
I have no idea how she can stand living with such a nagging husband as hers.


not be sb's cup of tea
nie być w czyimś guście
In fact, horror films aren't my cup of tea.


not harm/hurt a fly
nie skrzywdzić nawet muchy
My brother can be irritating and bad-tempered sometimes but he wouldn't hurt a fly.


not have a clue
nie mieć pojęcia
I haven't a clue where she left her book.


not my scene
nie moja "działka"
I don't like heavy metal music. It's not my scene.


noughts and crosses
kółko i krzyżyk
Noughts and Crosses is a very popular game among students sitting on lectures.


of one's own accord
z własnej woli, inicjatywy
I didn't ask him to clean up my car - he did it of his own accord.


off colour
marnie, słabo (czuć się, wyglądać)
Sue was looking off colour when I met her. I'm worried about her.


off the beaten track
na odludziu, poza 'utartym szlakiem'
His cottage is off the beaten track, so you may need explicit instructions how to get there.


off the map
poza mapą, odległy, daleki
I can't remember the name of the place where Jenny lives; it's a tiny village way off the map.


off the point
nie na temat
We were all talking about our jobs so Nick's comment on his marriage was rather off the point.


off your own bat
z własnej inicjatywy
Don't say I told you to do it, you did it off your own bat and I had nothing to do with it.


on all fours
na czworakach
My children love to have me on all fours playing with them.


on cloud nine
bardzo szczęśliwy, w siódmym niebie
She has been on cloud nine since she was promoted.


on horseback
wierzchem
Travelling on horseback took days and one could never be sure that they would reach their destination.


on impulse
spontanicznie
When the weather is nice it's fun to go away on impulse.


on location
(o programie, filmie) w plenerze
The series was filmed on location in Sweden.


on one's own account
na własne ryzyko
Well, you can try to run your own business, but remember that it will be on your own account.


on the dole
na zasiłku dla bezrobotnych
She's been on the dole for two years and she still hasn't got a job.


on the market
w sprzedaży, na rynku
At the moment this is the best camera on the market.


on the road
w podróży
Steve's job involves being on the road six days a week.


on thin ice
na niepewnym gruncie
His rude answer put him on thin ice in the company.


on top of the world
bardzo szczęsliwy/a
She's feeling on top of the world when he won the prize.


on your own initiative
z własnej inicjatywy
She realized that she had never done anything on her own initiative without the motivation of someone else.


once and for all
raz na zawsze
I tell you once and for all - I am tired of your complaining about your job! There is nothing else you can do.


once in a blue moon
bardzo rzadko
I only go to the theatre once in a blue moon; I prefer cinema.


out of date
przestarzały, staroświecki
I don't like this design - it is absolutely out of date to me.


out of print
wyczerpany nakład książki
I'm sorry but the book you've ordered is out of print.


out of stock
nie być dostępnym w sprzedaży
I'm so sorry but this camera is out of stock now. Can I propose a different model within the same price?


out of the blue
znienacka, nieoczekiwanie
The letter came out of the blue - I didn't expect to hear from him ever again.


out of the ordinary
niezwykły, specjalny, niecodzienny
My friend's paintings are out of the ordinary; I've never seen something like that before.


out of the question
wykluczone
I will not let my son go to France on his own. It is out of the question.


out of this world
świetny, doskonały
This restaurant is rather expensive but the food is really out of this world!


over my dead body!
po moim trupie!
I want to sell our house. Over my dead body! That house will never be sold.


over the counter
bez recepty
I'm afraid you can't buy this medicine over the counter, you must have a prescription.


pay tribute to sb/sth
wyrażać (komuś) swoje uznanie, oddawać hołd
In 1992, a concert was held at Wembley Stadium to pay tribute to Freddie Mercury from Queen.


pins and needles
mrowienie, 'mrówki'
I've got pins and needles in my leg! I have to move it.


plead guilty
przyznać się do winy
Having seen his face on security video-tape he couldn't use his alibi any longer and finally pleaded guilty.


poke/stick your nose into sth
wtykać nos w
She's always poking her nose into other people's business.


pop the question
oświadczyć się
After seven years of dating, I finally popped the question to my girlfriend.


pretty penny
niezła sumka
He hit the jackpot and quite unexpectedly got pretty penny on his bank account.


promise wonders
obiecywać złote góry
She was very disappointed with the job. They promised wonders when they hired her but nothing came true...


pull somebody's leg
nabierać, drażnić się
Mary had me fooled for a while, but finally I realized she was just pulling my leg.


put in jeopardy
narazić na niebiezpieczeństwo
As the Ambassador didn't want to put the staff in jeopardy, they were all dismissed and sent home.


put one's foot down
sprzeciwić się
My boss wanted me to work on weekends but I was brave enough to put my foot down.


put pressure
wywierać presję
The press are putting pressure on the minister to resign.


put sb through hell
zrobić komuś piekło na ziemi, spowodować cierpienie
Our boss put us through hell before he admitted that actually it wasn't our fault that we had failed with the deadline.


put sb/be at a disadvantage
stawiać kogoś/być w niekorzystnej sytuacji
The fact that the company's office was moved to the different part of the town has put me at a disadvantage. Now I have to commute almost one hour to get there.


rat race
wyścig szczurów
After years in the rat race she's finally decided to quit and spend more time with her family.


read sb's hand
wróżyć z ręki
She wanted the Gypsy woman to read her hand and find out about her future.


red tape
biurokracja
Because of all the red tape she didn't get her visa on time and had to cancel her holidays in Mexico.


red-letter day
szczególny dzień
Tomorrow is my red-letter day - I am getting promoted.


ring the bell
brzmieć znajomo, kojarzyć się z czymś
I don't know where I might have met him, but the name rings the bell.


rise and shine
wstawaj!
Come on! Rise and shine. We've got to leave now.


safe and sound
cały i zdrowy
To everybody's relief, he returned safe and sound from the storm.


scared to death
śmiertelnie przerażony
Last night I was scared to death when I discovered that someone was following me.


see pink elephants
widzieć białe myszki
Tim has a drinking problem. He drinks till he sees pink elephants.


self-made man
człowiek, który sam się dorobił, zrobił karierę
The idea of self-made man is one of the most important concepts in America.


sell like hot cakes
sprzedawac sie bardzo szybko
The album of this new Irish rock group sells like hot cakes - people ask for it everyday.


shed blood
przelewać krew
Much blood was shed during the war.


shoot the breeze
paplać
She can sit with her friend for hours doing nothing but shooting the breeze!


show-off
popis, mający na celu zdobycie poklasku
Don't worry. We still have the chance. His lawyer's defence speech was nothing more but a rhetorical show-off.


snap one's fingers
pstrykać palcami
Music often inspires people to clap or snap their fingers.


so what?
i co z tego?
She's angry at you. So what? I don't like her anyway.


so what?
i co z tego? kogo to obchodzi?
I know that Mary is jealous of me. So what?


spitting image of sb
uderzająco podobny do kogoś
Believe it or not but he is the spitting image of Dan Ackroyd.


square meal
porządny, solidny posiłek
No wonder you feel sick! All you've been eating recently are those instant soups! Get yourself one square meal a day and you will be fine.


Stand and deliver!
pieniądze albo życie!
'I said - stand and deliver or the devil he may take ya!' (Metallica "Whiskey in the Jar")


stark naked
zupełnie goły, całkiem nagi
The small children playing on the beach were stark naked.


steer away from
trzymać się z daleka
If I were you I would steer away from this guy. He is a womaniser - don't waste your time with him.


step by step
krok po kroku
Don't try to teach her everything at one time, do it step by step.


take a hike!
spływaj!
He got so annoying that finally I told him to take a hike.


take a shortcut
pojść na skróty
I wouldn't rely on him - he always thinks how to take shortcuts in everything he does.


take it easy
nie przejmuj się, wyluzuj się
Don't despair if you fail that exam; take it easy.


take sth for granted
przyjmować coś za rzecz oczywistą, naturalną
Never take love for granted. It has to be cherished to last.


that's my funeral
to mój problem, nic ci do tego
You eat too much! You will put on weight! -That's my funeral...


the Big Apple
New York City
I'm planning to visit the Big Apple this year.


the black sheep (of the family)
czarna owca (w rodzinie)
Everybody says he's the black sheep of the family - he left home when he was 17 and became a singer.


the cupboard is bare
kasa jest pusta
I would love to go with you sailing but this month the cupboard is bare.


the end justifies the means
cel uświęca środki
Many people strongly oppose the machiavellian approach that the end justifies the means.


the first pancake is always spoiled
pierwsze koty za płoty
Don't worry! The first pancake is always spoiled. Just try again.


the game worth the candle
gra warta świeczki
I'm going to do everything to marry him! - But Ann, is the game worth the candle?!


the grapevine
poczta pantoflowa
I heard on/through the grapevine that you are moving to Warsaw, is that true?


the grass is greener on the other side of the fence
wszędzie dobrze gdzie nas nie ma
When you look at other homes, the grass is often greener on the other side of the fence.


the lesser of two evils
mniejsze zło
Sometimes we have to choose between the lesser of two evils.


the naked eye
gołym okiem
Bacteria are too small to be seen with the naked eye.


the other side of the coin
druga strona medalu
Fame has the other side of the coin as well.


the root of the problem
źródło problemu
The root of the problem is that they don't learn enough to pass this exam.


the tip of the iceberg
wierzchołek góry lodowej
The problems we've already experienced are just the tip of the iceberg, I'm afraid.


throw somebody in at the deep end
rzucić kogoś na głęboką wodę
You want to learn Spanish? There's no better way than to throw yourself in at the deep end - go to Spain.


time is money
czas to pieniądz
Come on, hurry up! Remember, time is money.


time please!
zamykamy! (in a pub)
Time please! These were the last drinks. Please come back tomorrow.


Time's up!
czas się skończył!
Time's up now, put down your pens and leave the class, please.


to add fuel to the fire/flames
dolewać oliwy do ognia
Michael is furious at me. Telling him that I took his book will only add fuel to the fire.


to be after sb's own heart
o podobnych poglądach, upodobaniach
This guy is after my own heart - I think it is worth making friends with him.


to be all ears
zamienić się w słuch
I'm all ears- tell me how it happened that you've come back to Poland.


to be as sober as a judge
zupełnie trzeźwy, trzeźwy jak świnia
You may not believe me but I know what I saw - I was sober as a judge when it happened.


to be at one's wits' end
odchodzić od zmysłów
She was at her wits' end when she learnt that the avalanche was in the area where her kids usually went skiing.


to be back on sb's feet
pozbierać się po chorobie, stanąć na nogi
He took a doctor's leave for a week, but he's back on his feet now.


to be broke
być spłukanym, bez kasy
I'm afraid I can't lend you any money; I'm absolutely broke.


to be down in the dumps
mieć depresję, 'doła'
Well, you can try to ask her out but she is down in the dumps and I can't promise that she will answer the phone first of all...


to be head over heels in love
być zakochanym po uszy
Jim's head over heels in love with Monica; he talks only about her.


to be in a rut
popaść w rutynę
I think I have to change my lifestyle; I'm in a rut.


to be in high spirits
być w radosnym nastroju
Mary passed her last exam yesterday and she was in high spirits all day.


to be in somebody's shoes
być na czyimś miejscu
I wouldn't like to be in Susan's shoes - imagine taking that difficult exam again!


to be in the know
być wtajemniczonym w coś
I should ask Roger; he's the boss and he's in the know.


to be in the pink
być zdrowym
My sister is finally back in the pink after having a bad cold for two weeks.


to be in the right
mieć rację, słuszność
There's no need to apologize; you were in the right.


to be in the same boat
być w tej samej (zwykle złej) sytuacji
Jane and I are in the same boat; neither of us has got a job.


to be into something
być czymś zainteresowany, lubić coś
Don't ask me about Manga - I am not into it at all.


to be killing sb
dobijać, dawać się we znaki
I had my first horse - riding lesson yesterday and today my back is killing me...


to be loaded
być nadzianym
Look at the car he is driving! This guy has to be pretty loaded...


to be not much of a ...
nie za dobry ...
Ugh! She is not much of a singer, I'm afraid.


to be on everyone's lips
być na ustach wszystkich
Local government elections which are to take place next week are now on everyone's lips.


to be out of one's mind
być szalonym, postradać zmysły
She must be out of her mind to want to marry such a fool!


to be well off
być dobrze sytuowanym, bogatym
I think they must be well off - judging from their house and the car in the backyard...


to bite the dust
umrzeć, przekręcić się, 'gryźć ziemię'
John was already 89 when he bit the dust.


to break the news to sb
zakomunikować komuś przykrą wiadomość
I had the unpleasant duty of breaking the news of John's death to his wife.


to bring sth to light
ujawnić jakieś fakty, informację
My last conversation with Mary brought to light many things about our relationship which I hadn't realized before.


to brush up
'odkurzyć', podszlifować (umiejętności, jezyk itp.)
My French has got a bit rusty, I'm afraid. I will need to brush it up before the holidays.


to burn rubber
wciskać gaz do dechy, palić gumy
He has got another ticket! He simply can't drive if he doesn't burn rubber!


to burn the midnight oil
pracować lub uczyć się do późna w nocy
I had an important exam today so I had to burn the midnight oil yesterday.


to bury the hatchet
zakopać topór wojenny
Of course this old quarrel is long forgotten! Why don't Kate and Mike bury the hatchet at last?


to call a spade a spade
nazywać rzeczy po imieniu
Stop moaning that that you don't like the idea! Just go to your boss and call a spade a spade!


to call sb names
wyzywać kogoś
He called her names when she refused to date him, which only proved that it was actually a right decision...


to chase the dragon
palić opium lub heroinę
When the police entered the abandoned factory hall, they found a dozen of young people chasing the dragon there.


to come down to earth
zejść na ziemię
Come down to earth and stop dreaming about Mark; he doesn't even like you.


to cost a bomb
kosztować fortunę, masę pieniędzy
It's a very beautiful house but I'm afraid it must cost a bomb!


to cross one's mind
przychodzić do głowy / na myśl
It never crossed my mind that he could be in love with me.


to cry one's eyes out
płakać bardzo mocno, ryczeć
Julie cried her eyes out when she failed an important exam.


to cut sth/sb short
przerywać
I intended to explain the whole situation to him but he cut me short.


to do a number on sb
wykręcić komuś numer
He really did a number on his ex-girlfriend, making her come back to him and then dumping her.


to do time
siedzieć w więzieniu, odsiadywać karę
The man who attacked my friend last year is doing time for murder now.


to drop a brick
powiedzieć coś nietaktownego, nie na miejscu
I dropped a brick when I told my brother I didn't like Mary at all; I didn't know he was seeing her.


to drop sb a line
napisać parę słów do kogoś
Drop me a line when you've got time, ok?


to eat like a horse
jeść jak koń
I'm not surprised he's fat, he eats like a horse!


to eat sb's words
odszczekać coś, przyznać się do błędu
The President went too far. I think that public opinion will force him to eat his words.


to fall for someone
zakochać się
Julie goes to this pub every night because she has fallen for its barman.


to fall into the wrong hands
wpaść w złe, nieodpowiednie ręce
I'm looking for someone responsible to take my puppy; I won't let it fall into the wrong hands.


to feel it in one's bones
czuć to w kościach
It's going to be a long and cold winter- I can feel it in my bones.


to fly off the handle
wyjść z siebie, wściec się
I swear - one more remark like this and I will fly off the handle!


to frame / to be framed
wrabiać kogoś
"Who Framed Roger Rabbit" is my favourite movie from the nineties.


to get cold feet
stchórzyć, rozmyślić się
They'll be married next week; if Chester doesn't get cold feet.


to get hot under the collar
dostać piany, wściec się
When he saw his girlfriend winking at the guy sitting next to her, he simply got hot under the collar.


to get on like a house on fire
świetnie sie dogadywać
Tom and Jerry get on like a house on fire. They've been friends for years.


to get somebody wrong
źle, opacznie kogoś zrozumieć
Don't get me wrong. I didn't want to say he was a fool.


to get sth off your chest
wyrzucić coś z siebie, zrzucić ciężar z serca
I kept on thinking about telling Mark that he hurt me and I was glad to get it off my chest at last.


to get sth straight
wyjaśniać coś
Let's get this straight. You're sure you didn't leave your wallet at home, right?


to get the hang of sth
'zaczaić' coś, załapać (jak coś działa, lub na czym polega)
And then, as I finally got the hang of this new system, everything turned out to be so easy.


to get the sack
być wyrzuconym/wylanym z pracy
Tom wasn't good enough at work and he got the sack.


to give sb a big hand
głośno oklaskiwać
The audience gave me a big hand when I finished my speech.


to give sb five
przybić piątkę
That was great! Give me five!


to give someone a buzz
zadzwonić do kogoś
Sorry. I have to go now, but I will give you a buzz later, ok?


to give someone a hand
pomóc komuś
Could you please give me a hand with the luggage? It's really heavy.


to go
na wynos
Can I have two small pizzas- to go, please?


to go over with a fine-tooth comb
przeczesać coś
She went over her boyfriend's stuff with a fine-tooth comb just to make sure he does not date anybody else.


to go to pieces
załamywać się, tracić panowanie nad sobą
After his child was badly injured in a car accident, he simply went to pieces.


to go to the dogs
pogarszać się
The country is going to the dogs; we really need a new government.


to go up in smoke
spełznąć na niczym
We wanted to visit my friends that weekend but it turned out that Terry had to work on Saturday and our plans simply went up in smoke.


to hammer sth into someone
wbijać komuś coś do głowy
My brother and I always had it hammered into us that we should respect old people.


to have a (good) nose for sth
mieć nosa do czegoś
He's a brilliant reporter who has a good nose for interesting stories.


to have a clue
mieć o czymś pojęcie
This new secretary is cute and really tries to do her best but, honestly speaking, she doesn't seem to have a clue what it is all about.


to have a face like thunder
być wściekłym
When I told Mark that I was going out with Kate he had a face like thunder as he was attracted to her as well.


to have a frog in your throat
nie móc nic powiedzieć (z powodu suchości w gardle lub ze zdenerwowania)
The lecturer asked me to present my paper in front of all students but I couldn't because I had a frog in my throat.


to have a heart of gold
mieć złote serce
Mr Brown has a heart of gold, he would do anything to make his children happy.


to have a sharp tongue
mieć cięty język
I try to avoid discussions with her - she's got a sharp tongue and she can upset me.


to have a stab at sth
próbować czegoś
I've never tried diving in my life but I'll have a stab at it in Egypt.


to have a sweet tooth
lubić słodycze
Kelly has a sweet tooth. She can eat candies and chocolates all day long.


to have a word with sb
zamienić z kimś słowo
Could I have a word with you about our meeting?


to have an early night
pójść wcześnie spać
I'm going to have an early night tonight because I'm really tired.


to have both feet on the ground
stąpać twardo po ziemi
Susan is very practical and she has both feet on the ground.


to have butterflies in one's stomach
denerwować się, mieć tremę
I had butterflies in my stomach when I was waiting for the results of my exam yesterday.


to have green fingers
mieć smykałkę do ogrodnictwa
My husband has got green fingers - look at our flowers in the garden.


to have mixed feelings
mieć mieszane uczucia
I have mixed feelings about Mark. I like him but I think he has some dark secrets.


to have one's heart in one's mouth
mieć duszę na ramieniu; drżeć ze strachu
When I think of my exam tomorrow, I have my heart in my mouth.


to have one's heart in the right place
mieć dobre serce
He has not a very pleasant manner, but his heart is in the right place.


to have sth on the tip of sb's tongue
mieć coś na końcu języka
Gosh! I had the answer on the tip of my tongue but of course it wasn't enough to pass the exam...


to have the last word
mieć ostatnie słowo
My father always likes to have the last word in any discussion.


to have the time of one's life
świetnie się bawić, przeżywać coś bardzo miłego
I took my kids to Disneyland last summer and they had the time of their lives.


to have words with somebody
sprzeczać się, kłócić się
I think Mark had words with his girlfriend today because he is very nervous.


to hit the jackpot
wygrać los na loterii, zgarnąć całą pulę
'How does it come that he can afford such a car if he works at a construction site!? He must have hit the jackpot or something!'


to hit the roof
wściec się
My parents hit the roof when I told them that I failed my exam again.


to hold the guns
mieć wszystkie atuty w ręku
Well, it's hard to come up with any reasonable argument in this discussion if he holds the guns.


to hold water
być sensownym, dać się udowodnić (pozytywnie)
This theory was easy to abolish - the arguments simply didn't hold water.


to keep one's nose to the grindstone
pracować bez wytchnienia
Just try to keep your nose to the grindstone and you'll certainly pass the final exam.


to keep one's word
dotrzymywać słowa
Sue said she would help me to find a job and I hope she will keep her word.


to keep oneself to oneself
żyć cicho, samemu, bez towarzystwa
Mary hardly ever goes out with us; she keeps herself to herself.


to keep sb's ear to the ground
dowiadywać sie co w trawie piszczy
I have no idea what they are up to, but I will keep my ear to the ground. Once I learn what they plan, I'll let you know.


to keep sb's fingers crossed
trzymać kciuki
Good luck! I will keep my fingers crossed.


to keep sth quiet
utrzymać coś w tajemnicy
I didn't want to worry my sick mother and I managed to keep my divorce quiet for some time.


to kick a/the habit
skończyć z nawykiem, rzucić coś
John used to smoke a lot but he kicked the habit 2 years ago.


to kill somebody with kindness
zagłaskać kota na śmierć
My husband is killing me with kindness. Sometimes I just need to be left alone and he wants to spend all day with me.


to kill time
zabić czas
I only read magazines in doctors' waiting rooms to kill time.


to kill two birds with one stone
upiec dwie pieczenie na jednym ogniu
By enrolling her son in a hobby class Mary has killed two birds with one stone. Not only is he learning something useful but he is also watching less TV.


to know sth like the back of sb's hand
znać jak własną kieszeń
I can be your guide in this city - I grew up here so I know the place like the back of my hand.


to labour the point
rozwodzić się nad czymś, wałkować coś
Don't even bother asking him! He will labour the point for ages, and I think you need the answer pretty fast.


to land/fall on one's feet
spaść na cztery łapy
Jim is a type of a guy that, no matter what, seems to land on his feet.


to live to a grand old age
żyć bardzo długo, dożyc późnej starości
Our dog was always very active and lived to a grand old age.


to lose face
stracić twarz, honor
I guess John thinks he would lose face if he admitted he had made a mistake.


to lose heart
stracić wiarę w coś
Don't lose heart because you cannot solve the problem straight away.


to make a mess of sth
zepsuć coś, źle coś zrobić
I know I've made a mess of my exam and I'll have to take it again.


to make a scene
robić scenę, awanturę
Please don't make a scene. I'll do what you want.


to make ends meet
wiązać koniec z końcem
They're really poor; it's hard for them to make ends meet.


to make head or tail of sth
zrozumieć coś
Can you help me? I can't make head or tail of these instructions on the radio.


to make it a rule to do sth
robić coś z zasady, regularnie coś robić
I make it a rule to eat a lot vegetables.


to make/pull faces
robić, stroić miny
I know that my pupils often make faces behind my back.


to mind one's own business
pilnować własnego nosa, interesu
Why don't you stop criticizing me?! Mind your own business!


to miss the boat
przepuścić okazję, przegapić coś
Bill missed the boat by sending in his application form 2 days after the closing date.


to miss the point
nie zrozumieć czegoś, spudłować
Well, I don't know what to think about him - he seems to be quite clever but his last speech proved that he missed the whole point of this campaign.


to muddy the waters
zaciemniać obraz
For some reason they want to muddy the waters. I think their business is not quite legal...


to not know whether to laugh or cry
nie wiedzieć czy się śmiać czy płakać
When the teacher gave me the test and I looked at the questions, I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.


to one's heart's content
ile dusza zapragnie
There's a new restaurant on the corner. For just $10 you can eat to your heart's content.


to paint the town red
świetnie się bawić (zwykle chodząc od baru do baru)
Let's paint the town red, boys! That was a difficult test and we all did well. We need to celebrate it.


to pick sb's brains
zasięgnąć rady (kogoś kto się na tym zna), skonsultować coś
Terry, I need to pick your brains about the computer software - I've heard you are an expert.


to pick up the pieces
naprawić coś, uporządkować
After the fire in the factory, it took weeks to pick up the pieces and get production back to normal again.


to play ducks and drakes
puszczać kaczki na wodzie
'It's incredible! I can't find any single pebble here!' 'Oh, probably some kids were playing ducks and drakes here and they threw them all to water.'


to play second fiddle
grać drugorzędną rolę, pozostawać w cieniu
Ken doesn't intend to play second fiddle to her; he wants to be the boss.


to play something by ear
robić coś spontanicznie, improwizować
If our plan fails, we can always play it by ear. It might work.


to play truant
chodzić na wagary
More and more children are caught playing truant.


to play with fire
igrać z ogniem
Tom is negotiating with two publishers at the same time for the same novel. He's playing with fire.


to pluck up courage
zbierać się na odwagę
After few days Mike decided to pluck up courage and ask Helen out.


to prick up your ears
nadstawiać uszy/u
I pricked up my ears when I heard my parents speaking about me.


to pull yourself together
opanować się, wziąć się w garść
Pull yourself together and come back to work, please.


to put a stop to something
kłaść czemuś kres
He doesn't work and only spends my sister's money; I have to put a stop to it!


to put down roots
osiąść, zakorzenić się, ustatkować
He finally put down roots after living and working in many different places.


to put one's best foot forward
bardzo się postarać, włożyć w coś dużo wysiłku
If you really want to pass this exam, you'll have to put your best foot forward.


to put sb's back up
denerwować, drażnić
The way he discussed things with her really put her back up.


to put the brakes on
przestać coś robić
I think we will have to put the brakes on spending so much money on leisure activities.


to raise one's hand against sb
podnieść na kogoś rękę
If you ever raise your hand against me, I'll leave you.


to read between the lines
czytać między wierszami
He said he was very tired, but, reading between the lines, he simply didn't feel like coming to my party.


to read someone's mind/thoughts
czytać komuś w myślach
We understand each other very well and I sometimes think she reads my mind.


to read sth from cover to cover
przeczytać coś od deski do deski
This novel was so thrilling that I simply read it from cover to cover during one night!


to repay in kind
odpłacić, odwdzięczyć się
If you help a neighbour, he may repay in kind.


to rip sb off
'zedrzeć z kogoś' (cenowo)
Don't go to that hairdresser over there. It's nothing special but they will rip you off!


to rock the boat
szkodzić np. firmie, w której samemu się pracuje
I don't know what he is up to but he rocks the boat! Somebody should tell him it will do him no good.


to run errands
robić, załatwiać sprawunki
I have to run errands for my parents after my school.


to save face
zachować twarz
The comment that he made was only an attempt to save face in that difficult situation.


to save something for a rainy day
odkładać coś na czarną godzinę
Don't spend all your money just like that! You'd better save some for a rainy day.


to see red
wściec się
When Chris told me he'd crashed my car, I just saw red.


to serve him/her right
dobrze (jemu/jej) tak!
Frank's girlfriend has left him?! Serves him right! He behaved like a shmuck!


to shoot oneself in the foot
strzał w stopę (samobój)
He shot himself in the foot when he decided to cut on public spending - he lost the support immediately.


to show one's face
pokazywać się, pojawiać
After all the trouble you have caused, don't you dare to show your face here again!


to sleep like a log
spać jak zabity
Did you sleep well last night? Yes, thanks. Like a log!


to sling mud at sb
obrzucić kogoś błotem
This presidential campaign was nothing more than mud slinging.


to slip sb's mind
zapomnieć czegoś, wylecieć z pamięci
I felt so terrible when I bought her these roses... It slipped my mind that she is allergic to them!


to smell a rat
podejrzewać, że coś jest źle, nie tak
Helen smelled a rat when her son started going out every evening so she followed him once and saw him buying drugs near a night club.


to spill the beans
wygadać się, wyjawić sekret
I showed Tom my present for our mother and asked him not to spill the beans.


to stab sb in the back
wbić komuś nóż w plecy
I thought I can trust him! And he went to the head office and told them everything - he stabbed me in the back!


to stand a chance
mieć widoki na powodzenie
I'd apply for this job if I were you, I think you stand a chance.


to stick sb's neck out
narażać się, podejmować ryzyko
Jack says he is not a coward, he just doesn't like to stick his neck out if it isn't absolutely necessary.


to swear like a sailor
klnąć jak szewc
I don't like George; he's vulgar and swears like a sailor.


to take issue with sb
nie zgadzać się z kimś, sprzeczać się
My sister took issue with me over my opinion of one of the leading politicians in our country.


to take one's time
nie śpieszyć się, robić coś powoli
We don't need these articles to be translated tomorrow, so relax, take your time and submit them next week.


to take pains to do sth
dokładać starań, wkładać dużo wysiłku
My boss takes pains to select the best employees.


to take sb/sth seriously
traktować kogoś/coś poważnie
Don't take everything he says seriously; he jokes a lot.


to take someone for a ride
oszukać kogoś, nabrać
Be careful when doing business with him; he may take you for a ride.


to take something into account
wziąć coś pod uwagę
Remember to take his age into account when deciding what kind of work to give him.


to take something to heart
brać sobie coś do serca
I didn't really mean that your husband is silly, so don't take it to heart.


to take sth into your head
zdecydować się nagle coś zrobić
He seems to have taken it into his head to ask Ann to marry him.


to take the floor
przemawiać, zabrać głos w dyskusji
We know the opinion of the prosecutor. Let the defence take the floor now.


to take the floor
zabrać głos
The Prime Minister will take the floor in budget discussion on Wednesday.


to take the mickey (out of somebody)
robić sobie żarty/jaja z kogoś
Mike was taking the mickey out of me when I was dancing.


to take your life in your hands
ryzykować własne życie
Every time my son goes parachuting, he takes his life in his hands.


to talk behind one's back
mówić o kimś za jego/jej plecami
I don't feel good at work as I know my colleagues are always talking behind my back.


to talk rubbish
mówić bzdury, głupstwa
I don't really like Mark; he talks rubbish most of the time.


to throw a party
urządzić przyjęcie, imprezę
We're throwing a party for Jim's birthday next week.


to throw the book at someone
udzielić komuś reprymendy
My boss threw the book at me for not correcting the report properly.


to thumb a lift
zatrzymywać samochód (prosząc o podwiezienie)
I'm afraid we have no choice and if we want to get out of here we have to thumb a lift.


to toe the line
podporządkować się
Two members have been expelled from the party as they didn't toe the party line in voting.


to treat someone like dirt
traktować kogoś jak śmiecia
I can't believe that Mark is still with Ann - she treats him like dirt!


to turn a blind eye
przymknąć na coś oko; udawać, że się nie widzi czegoś
The farmer knew that the boys from the neighbourhood stole his apples but he simply turned a blind eye to it.


to turn one's back on someone
odwrócić się do kogoś plecami
Mark disappointed me a few times but I can't turn my back on him now when he needs me.


to whet sb's appetite
zaostrzać apetyt
The trip was marvellous. We had a great time and the whole experience whetted our appetite for more.


to work for peanuts
pracować za marne grosze
Sarah says she doesn't mind working for peanuts as long as she can see that her work is appreciated.


too good to be true
zbyt piękne, by było prawdziwe
I still can't believe I got that job. It's just too good to be true.


train of thought
ciąg myśli
Stop interrupting me or I'll lose my train of thought.


trial and error
metoda prób i błędów
I found the answer by trial and error, which obviously took little more time.


under oath
pod przysięgą
I was asked to tell my story under oath at the trial.


under one's breath
pod nosem
Jack was angry when I told him the bad news and he was muttering something under his breath.


ups and downs
radości i smutki, zmienne koleje losu
Their relationship was full of ups and downs.


Watch your step!
Uważaj jak idziesz!
Watch your step! The floor is very slippery.


When hell freezes over!
prędzej kaktus mi tu wyrośnie!
No way! Next time I'll talk to her is when hell freezes over!


whistle in the dark
dodawać sobie odwagi
Totally alone in this big house we joked about nightmares, whistling in the dark perhaps.


white lie
niewinne kłamstewko
White lies are sometimes inevitable in order to protect other people's feelings.


wild horses wouldn't drag me
nic mnie nie przekona
Wild horses wouldn't drag me to Nick's party; I don't like him at all.


with a vengeance
z podwójną siłą
After a week of good weather winter has returned with a vengeance today.


with bated breath
ze wstrzymanym oddechem
They waited for the news with bated breath.


with open arms
z otwartymi ramionami, chętnie
I accepted Kate's invitation to her birthday party with open arms.


without a shadow of a doubt
bez cienia wątpliwości
I can guarantee that - without a shadow of a doubt this car is the best in its class on the market.


without fail
niezawodnie
The postman always comes at 10 o'clock without fail.


written all over one's face
wypisane na twarzy
When Nick was told that he hadn't won the contest, disappointment was written all over his face.


young at heart
młody duchem
Although my mother is over fifty, she's very energetic and young at heart.

